# Core Relational Algebra

* **Union, intersection, and difference.**
    * Usual set operations, but **both operands must have the same relation schema.**
* **Selection**: picking certain rows.
* **Projection**: picking certain columns.
* **Products** and **joins**: compositions of relations.
* **Renaming** of relations and attributes.

# Union, intersection, difference

* **$R \cup S$**
    * `SELECT ... UNION SELECT ...;`
    * (Duplicate elimination: UNION ALL: multiset, UNION: set)
* **$R \cap S$**
    * `SELECT ... INTERSECT SELECT ...;`
* **$R - S$**
    * `SELECT ... MINUS SELECT ...;`
    * (Some DBMS uses EXCEPT)

# Selection

* **$R1 := \sigma_{C}(R2)$**
    * $C$ is a condition (as in "if" statements) that refers to attributes of $R2$.
    * $R1$ is all those tuples of $R2$ that satisfy $C$.
    * `SELECT * FROM R2 WHERE C;`

# Projection

* **$R1 := \pi_{L}(R2)$**
    * $L$ is a list of attributes from the schema of $R2$.
    * $R1$ is constructed by looking at each tuple of $R2$, extracting the attributes on list $L$, in the order specified, and creating from those components a tuple for $R1$.
    * Eliminate duplicate tuples, if any.
    * `SELECT DISTINCT L FROM R2;`

# Extended Projection

* **Using the same $\pi_L$ operator, we allow the list $L$ to contain arbitrary expressions involving attributes:**
    1. Arithmetic on attributes, e.g., $A+B \rightarrow C$.
    2. Duplicate occurrences of the same attribute.
* `SELECT A+B AS C FROM R;`
* (AS -> optional)

# Product

* **$R3 := R1 \times R2$**
    * Pair each tuple $t1$ of $R1$ with each tuple $t2$ of $R2$.
    * Concatenation $t1t2$ is a tuple of $R3$.
    * Schema of $R3$ is the attributes of $R1$ and then $R2$, in order.
    * But beware attribute $A$ of the same name in $R1$ and $R2$: use $R1.A$ and $R2.A$.
* `SELECT * FROM R1, R2;` or
* `SELECT * FROM R1 CROSS JOIN R2;`

# Theta-Join

* **$R3 := R1 \bowtie_{C} R2$**
    * Take the product $R1 \times R2$.
    * Then apply $\sigma_{C}$ to the result.
* **As for $\sigma$, $C$ can be any boolean-valued condition.**
    * Historic versions of this operator allowed only $A\ \theta\ B$, where $\theta$ is $=, <$, etc.; hence the name "theta-join."
* `SELECT * FROM R1 JOIN R2 ON (C);`

# Natural Join

* **A useful join variant (natural join) connects two relations by:**
    * Equating attributes of the same name, and
    * Projecting out one copy of each pair of equated attributes.
* **Denoted $R3 := R1 \bowtie R2$.**
* `SELECT * FROM R1 NATURAL JOIN R2;`

# Renaming

* **The $\rho$ operator gives a new schema to a relation.**
* **$R1 := \rho_{R1(A1, ..., An)}(R2)$ makes $R1$ be a relation with attributes $A1, ..., An$ and the same tuples as $R2$.**
* **Simplified notation: $R1(A1, ..., An) := R2$.**
* `SELECT X1 A1, X2 A2, ... Xn An FROM R2;`
* `CREATE TABLE R1 AS SELECT X1 A1, X2 A2, ... Xn An FROM R2;`

# Sequences of Assignments

* **Create temporary relation names.**
* **Renaming can be implied by giving relations a list of attributes.**
* **Example: $R3 := R1 \bowtie_{C} R2$ can be written:**
    * $R4 := R1 \times R2$ (`CREATE TABLE R4 ...`)
    * $R3 := \sigma_{C}(R4)$ (`SELECT ... FROM R4 ...`)

# Expressions in a Single Assignment

* **Example: the theta-join $R3 := R1 \bowtie_{C} R2$ can be written:**
    * $R3 := \sigma_{C}(R1 \times R2)$
* **Precedence of relational operators:**
    1. $[\sigma, \pi, \rho]$ (highest).
    2. $[\times, \bowtie]$.
    3. $\cap$.
    4. $[\cup, -]$.

# The Extended Algebra

* **$\pi_{L}$ extended projection**
* **$\delta =$ eliminate duplicates from bags.**
* **$\tau =$ sort tuples.**
* **$\gamma =$ grouping and aggregation.**
* **Outerjoin: avoids "dangling tuples" = tuples that do not join with anything.**

# Extended Projection

* **Using the same $\pi_{L}$ operator, we allow the list $L$ to contain arbitrary expressions involving attributes:**
    1. **Arithmetic on attributes, e.g., $A+B \rightarrow C$**
        * "$\rightarrow$" stands for renaming the attribute in the result to "$C$"
    2. **Duplicate occurrences of the same attribute.**
* `SELECT A+B AS C FROM R;`
* ("AS" is optional)

# Duplicate Elimination

* **$R1 := \delta(R2)$.**
* **$R1$ consists of one copy of each tuple that appears in $R2$ one or more times.**

# Sorting

* **$R1 := \tau_{L}(R2)$.**
    * $L$ is a list of some of the attributes of $R2$.
* **$R1$ is the list of tuples of $R2$ sorted first on the value of the first attribute on $L$, then on the second attribute of $L$, and so on.**
    * Break ties arbitrarily.
* **$\tau$ is the only operator whose result is neither a set nor a bag.**

# Aggregation Operators

* **Aggregation operators are not operators of relational algebra.**
* **Rather, they apply to entire columns of a table and produce a single result.**
* **The most important examples: SUM, AVG, COUNT, MIN, and MAX.**
    * Example with Table $R(A, B)$:
        * $SUM(A) = 7$
        * $COUNT(A) = 3$
        * $MAX(B) = 4$
        * $AVG(B) = 3$

# Grouping Operator

* **$R1 := \gamma_{L}(R2)$. $L$ is a list of elements that are either:**
    1. Individual (grouping) attributes.
    2. $AGG(A)$, where $AGG$ is one of the aggregation operators and $A$ is an attribute.
        * An arrow and a new attribute name renames the component.

# Applying $\gamma\ L\ (R)$

* **Group $R$ according to all the grouping attributes on list $L$.**
    * That is: form one group for each distinct list of values for those attributes in $R$.
* **Within each group, compute $AGG(A)$ for each aggregation on list $L$.**
* **Result has one tuple for each group:**
    1. The grouping attributes and
    2. Their group’s aggregations.

# Outer join

* **Suppose we join $R \bowtie_{C} S$.**
* **A tuple of $R$ that has no tuple of $S$ with which it joins is said to be dangling.**
    * Similarly for a tuple of $S$.
* **Outerjoin preserves dangling tuples by padding them NULL.**

# Examples

| Relational Algebra Expression | SQL Equivalent |
| :--- | :--- |
| $\pi_{A, B+C \rightarrow X}(R)$ | `SELECT A, B+C AS X FROM R;` |
| $\delta(R)$ | `SELECT DISTINCT * FROM R;` |
| $R \cup S$ | `SELECT * FROM R UNION ALL SELECT * FROM S;` (multiset) |
| $R \cap S$ | `SELECT * FROM R INTERSECT ALL SELECT * FROM S;` **(!)** |
| $R - S$ | `SELECT * FROM R MINUS ALL SELECT * FROM S;` **(!)** |
| $\delta(R \cup S)$ | `SELECT * FROM R UNION SELECT * FROM S;` (set) |
| $\delta(R \cap S)$ | `SELECT * FROM R INTERSECT SELECT * FROM S;` (set) |
| $\delta(R) - \delta(S)$ | `SELECT * FROM R MINUS SELECT * FROM S;` (set) |
| $R \bowtie S$ | `SELECT * FROM R NATURAL JOIN S;` |
| $R \bowtie_{\theta} S$ | `SELECT * FROM R JOIN S ON (\theta);` |
| $R \times S$ | `SELECT * FROM R CROSS JOIN S;` or `SELECT * FROM R, S;` |
| $\gamma_{A, SUM(B)}(R)$ | `SELECT A, SUM(B) FROM R GROUP BY A;` |
| $\gamma_{A, COUNT(B)}(\delta \pi_{A,B} R)$ | `SELECT A, COUNT(DISTINCT B) FROM R GROUP BY A;` |
| $\tau_{A, B+C}(R)$ | `SELECT * FROM R ORDER BY A, B+C;` |
| Outer join | `SELECT * FROM R NATURAL LEFT OUTER JOIN S;` |
| Outer join | `SELECT * FROM R LEFT OUTER JOIN S ON R.B > S.D;` |

# Execution steps

**Execution steps of a SELECT statement expressed in relational algebra:**

1. Replace all usages of the temporary-tables defined in the **WITH**-clause.
2. $\bowtie$ joins or product operations after **FROM**-clause.
3. $\sigma$ selection based on the **WHERE**-clause.
4. $\gamma$ creating groups and computing aggregations, based on **GROUP BY**-clause.
5. $\sigma$ selection for the groups or tuples created from the groups, based on **HAVING**-clause.
6. $\pi$ projection based on **SELECT**-clause.
7. $\rho$ rename result attributes based on **AS** keyword.
8. $\cup \cap -$ **UNION, INTERSECT, MINUS** set operations.
9. $\delta$ duplicate elimination if we have **DISTINCT**.
10. $\tau$ sorting based on **ORDER BY** clause.